# 1.0 Introduction to session 1

During **Session 1** we will establish fundamental ideas and skills that are essential for using Nextflow and customizing the execution of nf-core workflows.

We will start by discussing the core features of nf-core and Nextflow and learning the fundamental commands and options for executing workflows. This knowledge will be applied as we learn about the structure of nf-core workflows and how to customize their execution. Finally we start working on a real-life nf-core workflow - `nf-core/rnaseq` - and write a command to get it up and running.

The ideas and skills you learn during Session 1 will be applied during **Session 2** where we will customise the execution of the `nf-core/rnaseq` workflow to optimise it for our data and computing environment.

## 1.0.1 Create a new work directory

It is good practice to organize projects into their own folders to make it easier to track and replicate experiments over time.

!!! example "Create a new working directory"

    Start by creating a new directory for all of today's activities:

    ```bash
    mkdir ~/session1
    ```

    Once created, open the folder in VS Code:

    1. Use the keyboard shortcut `Ctrl + K Ctrl + O` (Windows/Linux) or `Cmd + O` (MacOS).
    2. Navigate to `/home/<USERNAME>/session1` and click "Open" or press `Enter`, replacing `<USERNAME>` with your provided user name. The screen will refresh and the active folder in your VS Code session will now be the `session1` folder.

    !!! tip

        You can also open files and folders in VS Code using the `code` command we installed during [setup](../setup.md#install-the-code-command-on-the-remote-machine):

        ```bash
        code ~/session1
        ```

    !!! warning "Remember: `<USERNAME>` is a placeholder"

        At the start of this workshop, you will have a unique user name provided to you. Throughout these materials, we will use `<USERNAME>` as a placeholder, which you will need to replace with the user name given to you.